---
outline: deep
---

# Component demos

::: tip TL;DR
- Codex uses [VitePress](https://vitepress.vuejs.org/) to demo components.
- Run `npm run doc:dev` to serve the demo site locally.
- Each component should have a demo page. Demos should cover realistic use cases and variations of
  props and slots.
- Demos are written in Markdown files in `packages/codex-docs/component-demos` then compiled to
  `packages/codex-docs/docs/components/demos`.
:::

## The Codex docs site

Codex uses [VitePress](https://vitepress.vuejs.org/) to demo Vue components. Component demos should
provide working demonstrations and code samples for all realistic use cases of a component, plus all
variations of props and slots. Ideally, a user of the library could copy and paste a code sample
into their own code to use as a starting point.

### Local dev environment

To serve the VitePress site locally, run this command in the root of the Codex repository:

```bash
npm run doc:dev
```

This will both serve the VitePress site at `http://localhost:5173` and compile component usage docs.
If you need to serve the VitePress site on a different port, use `npm run doc:dev --port=12345`.
For ease of development, the site uses hot module reloading: changes to the source code are
immediately reflected in the browser, without needing to reload the page.

### Page generation

Although most of the docs are simply Markdown files within `packages/codex-docs/docs`, the component
page files in `packages/codex-docs/docs/components/demos` are automatically generated by
[vue-docgen-cli](https://vue-styleguidist.github.io/docs/docgen-cli.html).

Component demos are written in Markdown files outside of the `packages/codex-docs/docs` directory
(see below). vue-docgen-cli is configured to grab the demo file, add documentation that's generated
from the component's `.vue` file (page title, description, meta info, usage docs, etc.), and place
the generated file in `packages/codex-docs/docs/components/demos`.

### Code examples

Most code examples live in their own `.vue` file, in an `examples` directory underneath the relevant
component's demos directory. These files are imported in the component's Markdown file, both to
demonstrate the example and to display the source code. To make these code examples widely usable,
they do not use TypeScript, and only use JavaScript features that are available in
ECMAScript 2016 (ES7) and not more recently added features.

Because the way Vue and Codex is used in MediaWiki is different, component demos display two
versions of each code example: the original (labeled "NPM") and a transformed one for use in
MediaWiki (labeled "MediaWiki"). The transformation is done by an automatic build process, which
places MediaWiki-targeted versions of each example file in the `examples-mw` directory. These files
then have to be imported in the Markdown files (see the examples [below](#formatting-demos)).

If, for some reason, the automatic transformation process doesn't produce the right output,
you can also create the MediaWiki version manually. To do this, create a new file in the `examples`
directory (not the `examples-mw` directory!) and add `-MW` to the end of the file name, e.g.
`examples/Foo-MW.vue`. Then import this file instead of the `examples-mw` file in the Markdown
file.

## Writing component demos

### Create a new demo page

Once you have a `.vue` file for the component in `packages/codex`, you can add a demo
page for that component. This takes 2 steps:

1. Add a new directory for your component to `packages/codex-docs/component-demos`. This new
   directory should exactly match the machine name of the component. Add a file,
   `component-name.md`, to that directory.
2. Add a link to the page in the sidebar by editing VitePress config in
   `packages/codex-docs/docs/.vitepress/config.js`:

```js
// In packages/codex-docs/docs/.vitepress/config.ts
sidebar: {
	'/components/': [
		...
		{
			text: 'Components',
			items: [
				// Add more components here.
				// Note that components are now grouped by type.
				{ text: 'Button', link: '/components/demos/button' },
				{ text: 'Radio', link: '/components/demos/radio' }
			]
		},
		...
	]
}
```

### Importing components

You can import Codex components directly from the `@wikimedia/codex` package:

```js
<script setup>
import { CdxButton } from '@wikimedia/codex';
</script>
```

### Formatting demos

The CdxDemoWrapper component is available in all Markdown files and provides formatting for
components demos and code samples. To use it, place the demo code inside the `demo` slot, and
the code sample inside the `code` slot. The code can either be a Markdown code block or an imported
code snippet.

::: warning
Note that the whitespace before and after the code sample is required for the Markdown to compile
properly.
:::


Example using a Markdown code block:

````markdown
<cdx-demo-wrapper>
<template v-slot:demo>
<cdx-button weight="quiet">Click me</cdx-button>
</template>

<template v-slot:code>

```vue-html
<cdx-button>Click me</cdx-button>
```

</template>
</cdx-demo-wrapper>
````

Example using an imported code snippet:

````markdown
<script setup>
import RadioGroup from '@/../component-demos/radio/examples/RadioGroup.vue';
</script>

<cdx-demo-wrapper>
<template v-slot:demo>
<radio-group />
</template>

<template v-slot:code>

:::code-group

<<< @/../../component-demos/radio/examples/RadioGroup.vue [NPM]

<<< @/../../component-demos/radio/examples-mw/RadioGroup.vue [MediaWiki]

:::

</template>
</cdx-demo-wrapper>
````

Keep the code samples relevant to the library user. Your code sample doesn't actually have to match
the code used in the demo. For example, you might display an example component for the demo but
include a simplified version of that example component to display as the code snippet.

Non-trivial code snippets should have an npm version and a MediaWiki version. For imported code
snippets, the MediaWiki version is generated automatically. Code blocks written directly in the
Markdown file are usually so simple that a separate MediaWiki version is not needed. If an embedded
code block is not simple, consider moving it to a file and importing it.

### Configurable demos

If a component has several variations depending on prop and slot input, it may benefit from a
configurable demo that enables users to input different prop and slot values and check the results
on the fly. This can be achieved within the CdxDemoWrapper component, which can take in
configuration for prop and slot controls, then provide the current values of those props and slots
to the component demo via a [scoped slot](https://v3.vuejs.org/guide/component-slots.html#scoped-slots).

To set this up, create an array of config objects, one for each prop or slot you want to allow
the user to control. The following control types are available:

- `radio`: For props with a few known value options. Displays a radio for each provided value
option.
- `boolean`: For boolean props. Displays a true/false toggle that defaults to false.
- `text`: For props with string or number values. Displays a text input for the value.
- `select`: For props with a predefined list of value options displayed in a dropdown/select menu.
- `slot`: For slots. Displays a text input for the slot content.

You can set a default value for each control (required for slots), otherwise the value will default
to the first option (for `radio` controls), `false` (for `boolean` controls), or an empty string
(for `text` controls)

See `packages/codex-docs/docs/utils/types.ts` for full details on control configuration, or check out
the configuration for the Button demo:

```js
const controlsConfig = [
	{
		name: 'action',
		type: 'radio',
		options: [ 'default', 'progressive', 'destructive' ],
	},
	{
		name: 'type',
		type: 'radio',
		options: [ 'normal', 'primary', 'quiet' ],
	},
	{
		name: 'disabled',
		type: 'boolean'
	},
	{
		name: 'default',
		type: 'slot',
		default: 'Click me'
	}
];
```

Next, set up the component demo. Pass the controls config to the Wrapper component via its
`controlsConfig` prop, then use the `demo` slot with `propValues` and `slotValues` bindings to wrap
your component demo. `propValues` is an object keyed on prop name with the current value of each
prop, and `slotValues` is an object keyed on slot name with the current content of each slot. This
is how the configurable Button demo is set up:

```vue-html
<cdx-demo-wrapper :controls-config="controlsConfig">
<template v-slot:demo="{ propValues, slotValues }">
<cdx-button v-bind="propValues">{{ slotValues.default }}</cdx-button>
</template>
</cdx-demo-wrapper>
```

### Styling demo pages

Styles for a component demo page should be placed inside a `<style>` block in the markdown file.

Styles for example components should be scoped to ensure they only apply to that component.
